.TH TDDES Tool_Descriptions
.bp 4

.SH Tool Description Entry Format
.PP
Each Tool description is written in a common format
which includes at least some of the following subsections.
.IP
SYNOPSIS: 
gives the form of the command line necessary to use the Tool.
The conventions used are described
on the next page.
.IP
DESCRIPTION: 
discusses the Tool in detail,
including telling about the command line arguments
and offering suggestions on how to use the Tool.
.IP
EXAMPLES: 
presents and explains examples of using the Tool,
often in conjunction with other Tools.
This section often provides ideas on how you might use the Tool.
.IP
SCRATCH AND SYSTEM DATA FILES: 
lists the Tool-defined files used.
Temporary files are created in the directory specified by the TEMP
variable,
which is described in the entry for the
.I set
Tool.
.IP
SEE ALSO: 
names Tools that perform similar or related functions.
.IP
DIAGNOSTICS: 
lists the error messages the Tool can produce.
Reference is occasionally made to limits in the Tool source code that
may be changed;
the values for this implementation of the Tools
are specified in the "Tool Limits" part of the
System Specific section of the manual.
.IP
LIMITATIONS AND DEFICIENCIES: 
tells of potential problem areas.
Tool limits, as mentioned under DIAGNOSTICS, may also be listed here.
.bp
.SHConventions Used on the Synopsis Line
.PP
The synopsis line for each entry shows the command line arguments
that may be used with the Tool.
Certain conventions have been adopted to present the information
accurately.
Some arguments are optional,
some are required, and some are required to go with other arguments.
The conventions adopted to express how arguments are used
are described here.
.ne 5
.LP
Sample synopsis line:
.DS
.fi
crt [-N]
.ul
[file ...]
.DE
.ne 15
.LP
.bd
The Rules
.NP
Flag options are one or more letters preceed by a dash (-)
or, occasionally, a plus sign (+).
They indicate some variation of or limit to the
basic operation of the Tool.
For example,
.RS
-a
+from -to
.RE
.NP
Numbers are indicated by the letter "N" preceeded by a dash or plus.
For example,
.RS
-N
.RE
.NP
Words that stand for something are underlined.
For example,
.RS
.I file
.RE
which stands for a file name.
The meaning of the word is often apparent but is always
explained in the description.
.NP
Optional arguments are enclosed in square brackets.
For example, if a filename is optional it is indicated by
.RS
.I [file]
.RE
.NP
If an argument type may occur any number of times, including none,
this is indicated by ellipsis.
For example,
.RS
.ul
[file ...]
.RE
indicates that any number of file names may be specified.
.NP
If a choice must be made between some options this is indicated by
enclosing them in braces ({...}).
The options to be chosen between are separated by pipe signs (|).
For example, if either flag a or b must be specified it would be
indicated this way: 
.RS
-{a|b}
.RE
.sp
.LP
.B Examples
.PP
Putting this all together, here are some real Tool synopsis lines.
.ne 4
.PP
crt [-N]
.ul
[file ...]
.br
means that you may specify a number and/or
zero, one, or more file names.
.ne 4
.PP
field {-tC |
.I fieldlist}
.I outputformat
.ul
[file ...]
.br
means that
.B either
the
.B -t
flag with something following it
.B or
some
.I fieldlist
must be specified,
and that an
.I outputformat
must be specified
and any number of files may be specified.
.ne 5
.PP
diff [-[c|d|r|s][v]]
.ul
file1 [file2]
.br
means that the flags are optional and
.bd
c, d, r,
and
.B s
may not be used together but any of them could be used with
.B v
(e.g.,
.B -cv).
One file must be specified and another may be specified if desired.
