.TH PROD Carousel_Tool_Products
.TL
Carousel MicroTools Products
.TE
.PP
The Carousel Tools consist of over sixty different 
programs, a relocatable program library, and
source code for all but the proprietary programs.
The Carousel Tools are available for CP/M-80 and MSDOS 
2.0 on a number of different computers.  
The programs and files can be purchased as a whole 
or in smaller packages called ToolBooks.
The different products of Carousel MicroTools are
described below.
.SH
Carousel ToolKit Manual
.PP
This is the primary user instruction and reference
manual for the Carousel ToolKits.   
It describes all the programs and library subroutines
of the Carousel Tools.  Individual
ToolBook packages may contain insertions for the 
manual.  No license is required to buy the manual.
.SH
Carousel Start-a-ToolKit
.PP
The Start-a-ToolKit is a package incorporating the 
following products:
.PP
\fB
.EX
Carousel ToolKit Manual
Carousel ToolKit License
Carousel Shell ToolBook
.EE
\fR
The Start-a-ToolKit is recommended for someone who wishes to test 
the flavor of using the Tools and to see how the 
Tools work on their computer system.  Additional 
ToolBooks will be required to obtain the full utility 
of the Tools.
.SH
Carousel Use-a-ToolKit
.PP
The Use-a-ToolKit is a package incorporating the 
manual and all the basic programs in the Carousel Tools.
The package includes the following 
products:
.PP
\fB
.EX
Carousel ToolKit Manual
Carousel ToolKit License
Carousel Shell ToolBook
Carousel TextEdit ToolBook
Carousel TextHandler ToolBook
Carousel Formatter ToolBook
Carousel DiskHandler ToolBook
Carousel Programmer ToolBook
.EE
\fR
.PP
The Use-a-ToolKit is the recommended package for 
anyone expecting to make serious use of the Tools.
.SH
Carousel Build-a-ToolKit
.PP
The Build-a-ToolKit is a package that includes the 
Use-a-ToolKit as well as 
the source and relocatable binaries required for
building new Tools.  It includes the following 
components:
.PP
\fB
.EX
Carousel Use-a-ToolKit
Carousel ToolBuilder ToolBook
.EE
\fR
.PP
The Build-a-ToolKit is recommended for those
who wish to modify the Tools or to build new Tools
or portable software.  The Kit does require the
use of a Fortran compiler and linker which must
be obtained from a third party.
See the notes on the ToolBuilder ToolBook for usage 
restrictions.
.SH
Carousel Shell ToolBook and License
.PP
The Shell ToolBook contains the basic software that 
is proprietary to Carousel MicroTools, Inc.  It 
consists of the *.com, *.tol and other types of 
files that are required to run all other Carousel 
Tools.  It also contains the Tools that are 
equivalent to the built-in functions of the native 
operating system plus a 
few of the other Tools of the full set.
.PP
The Shell ToolBook incorporates the single-user 
license for use of the proprietary Shell software 
on the user's system.  Additional licenses can be 
purchased if you have several hardware systems
at the same site on which the Tools are to be run.
.PP
The Shell ToolBook contains a diskette 
holding all of the files associated with the Shell.  
This diskette is formatted for a particular 
operating system and disk format.  This will be 
marked on the label of the diskette.  The ToolBook 
also contains a short tutorial on how to 
install the Shell onto your hardware as well 
as any updates for the manual that are required by 
the particular hardware and operating system.  The 
fourth item in the Shell ToolBook is the single-system
single-user license to be signed by the 
buyer.
.PP
The Shell diskette contains the following files:
.PP
\fB
.EX
run.com        major system overlay used by all Tools
sh.com         start shell operation
sh.env         environment table
cat.tol        join and show text files
cd.tol         change to different directory
cp.tol         copy one file to another
crt.tol        paginate files to terminal
date.tol       print/set time and date
dc.tol         desk calculator
echo.tol       print command line arguments
install.tol    installs the shell
logout.tol     log out of shell
ls.tol         list filenames in current directory
mv.tol         move (rename) file
pwd.tol        print working directory name
reset.tol      reset system after diskette change 
rm.tol         remove file
set.tol        set shell options
sh.tol         shell overlay in Tool form
tee.tol        copy input to output and named files
which.tol      print full pathname of command
.EE
\fR
.SH
Carousel TextEdit ToolBook
.PP
The TextEdit ToolBook contains the primary editors 
available in the Software Tools.  These Tools can fit 
onto one disk with the basic Tools from the Shell 
ToolBook so that it can operate as a stand-alone 
system disk in small floppy systems.
.PP
The contents of the TextEdit diskette are: 
.PP
\fB
.EX
ch.tol         change text patterns
diff.tol       enumerate differences between two files
e.tol          editor
sedit.tol      stream editor
tr.tol         character transliteration
.EE
\fR
.SH
Carousel TextHandler ToolBook
.PP
The TextHandler ToolBook contains Tools that 
manipulate text files to prepare them 
for formatting and output.  The Tools allow for 
investigation of the text strings and  preparation of 
special text output information (like indices). 
.PP
Some of the Tools in this ToolBook also appear in 
other ToolBooks.  This is done to provide a 
complete set of Tools for manipulating text in one 
place as well as providing special Tools for other 
sections.
.PP
The TextHandler diskette contains the following
files:
.PP
\fB
.EX
ch.tol         change text patterns
cmp.tol        compare two files
comm.tol       print lines common to two files
fb.tol         list blocks of lines with patterns
field.tol      manipulate fields of data
find.tol       display lines with patterns
includ.tol     include a file in another file
isam.tol       make index-sequential cross reference
kwic.tol       prepare lines for keyword-in-context index
lam.tol        merge lines of files together
ll.tol         show length of lines in file
mcol.tol       multicolumn formatting
number.tol     number the lines in a file
os.tol         show overstriking
pl.tol         print specified lines/pages
pr.tol         paginate files for printing
rev.tol        reverse order of lines
show.tol       show all character, including controls
sort.tol       sort/merge text files
split.tol      split file into smaller files
tail.tol       print last lines of a file
tr.tol         character transliteration
uniq.tol       remove adjacent repeated lines
unrot.tol      un-rotate lines prepared by ~kwic~
wc.tol         count lines, words, characters in file
xref.tol       make symbol cross reference list
.EE
\fR
.SH
Carousel Formatter ToolBook
.PP
The Formatter ToolBook contains files whose purpose 
is to format text files for printing or display.  
TextEdit and TextHandler Tools are used to develop 
these files.
.PP
The diskette contains the following files:
.PP
\fB
.EX
detab.tol      convert tabs to spaces
entab.tol      convert spaces to tabs and spaces
form.tol       form letter generator
format.tol     format text
ll.tol         show length of lines in file
macro.tol      macro processor
mcol.tol       multicolumn formatting
os.tol         show overstriking
pl.tol         print specified lines/pages
pr.tol         paginate files for printing
wc.tol         count lines, words, characters in file
.EE
\fR
.SH
Carousel DiskHandler ToolBook
.PP
The DiskHandler ToolBook contains Tools whose 
functions are to manipulate files by changing their 
form for space conservation or protection.  In 
particular, this ToolBook provides the user with 
the archiver.  Space is left available on the 
diskette so that a reasonably sized archive file
can be built on it.
.PP
The files on the DiskHandler diskette are: 
.PP
\fB
.EX
ar.tol         maintain archive file 
cpress.tol     compress input files
crypt.tol      encrypt/decrypt a file
expand.tol     un-compress input files
split.tol      split a file into smaller files
.EE
\fR
.SH
Carousel Programming ToolBook
.PP
The Programming ToolBook is composed of those Tools 
and scripts that contribute to the development of 
programs, especially 
.bd
ratfor
programs.  It is 
required if one is to make use of the ToolBuilder 
ToolBook.  It assumes the presence of the Fortran 
compiler and linker used to compile the Tools on 
the system.  For CP/M-80 this is the MicroSoft 
Fortran-80 and Linker-80.  For MSDOS 2.0 it is the 
IBM Fortran and Linker.
.PP
The files on the diskette of the ToolBook are: 
.PP
\fB
.EX
fc (script)    compile, link and load
ld (script)    link and load
rc (script)    ratfor, compile, link and load
ratdef         standard definitions for ~ratfor~
fsort.tol      sort ~ratfor~ declarations for compile
includ.tol     file inclusion preprocessor
ratfor.tol     ratfor preprocessor
tsort.tol      sort symbols topologically
xref.tol       make symbol cross reference list
.EE
\fR
.SH
Carousel ToolBuilder ToolBook
.PP
The ToolBuilder ToolBook consists of the source for the 
public domain software in the Carousel Tools and 
the relocatable library 
for the public domain as well as the proprietary software.  
Manual updates will include the documentation for 
the library routines.
.PP
This ToolBook contains from three to six diskettes,
depending on the format.
In general, the files on the diskettes will be the 
following:
.PP
\fB
.EX
ratdef         ratfor definitions for the Tools
*.ar           source archives for programs in Shell,
                  TextEdit, TextHandler, Formatter,
                  DiskHandler and Programmer ToolBooks.
libdefs        ratfor definitions for the library
publib.rat     public library ratfor source
cmtlib.rel     CMT proprietary relocatable library
ratlib.rel     merged relocatable library
runsys.rel     subroutine shell for all Tools
.EE
\fR
There are three restrictions regarding use of the 
ToolBuilder ToolBook:
.NP
The relocatable files are compiler and linker 
dependent, and you must use the recommended 
compiler and linker for the files to be useful.
.NP
You may make use of the proprietary library for 
building new Tools or programs for your own use.  
However, if you intend to distribute or sell 
programs incorporating parts of the proprietary 
library you must execute a special licensing arrangement 
with Carousel MicroTools, Inc. 
.NP
Carousel MicroTools, Inc. makes no claim to the 
source code provided, and in no way does Carousel 
warrant that the source code is in the public 
domain or that it is not proprietary to some other 
third party.
.SH
Carousel Add-a-ToolKits
.PP
Carousel MicroTools, Inc. plans to offer new Tools to its
existing customers from time to time.  Some of these
will be written by Carousel, other will be provided by
owner of ToolBuilder ToolBooks.  They will be announced
in the Carousel Script Newsletter.
