.TH SS TOL_File_format
.TL
SYSTEM-SPECIFIC SECTION FOR MACHINES RUNNING CP/M-80
.TE
.PP
This section of the Carousel ToolKits User Manual has computer operating
system-specific information:
.NP
how the Carousel Tools work on CP/M-80;
.NP
a discussion on installing the shell and Tools on your computer;
.NP
instructions for installing the shell
and confirming that the Tools work;
.NP
instructions for installing the other Tools;
.NP
summaries of naming conventions and special characters
used in CP/M-80 and the Tools;
.NP
a list of limits in the CP/M-80 implementation of
various Tools;
.NP
miscellaneous notes and reminders on the use of the Tools;
and
.NP
examples of common tasks using CP/M and the Tools.
.PP
When installing the Tools you should have at hand
any installation instructions that came with the
ToolBook you are going to install.
They will supplement these instructions for your
specific machine.
.PP
As with any new software,
you should make one or more copies of the diskettes
you received from Carousel and store the originals
in a safe place.
Use
.I pip
or your preferred disk copy program.
Use a copy with the instructions below.
.PP
If you have not yet read the "Beginners Introduction"
tutorial you should do so now.
The terminology explained there is used in the rest
of this section.
.bp
.SH
The Carousel Tools .tol File Format
.PP
.eh 'Installation Discussion''CP/M-80 System-Specific'
.oh 'CP/M-80 System-Specific''Installation Discussion'
The information in this discussion is informative,
but is not crucial
to using the Tools.
You can skip it for now but might want to read it later.
.PP
The shell and Tools are programs that are designed to be
run together.
The shell reads your commands, loads and executes the
appropriate Tools and other programs,
and causes itself to be restarted again when the
command is done.
.PP
The shell and all the Tools share a common portion of code.
When the shell loads a Tool the common code part of
the shell is left in memory and only the new parts of code
needed for the Tool are loaded.
Likewise, when the shell is reloaded after a Tool is
done only the parts of code needed for the
shell are loaded
(over the specific code for the previous Tool).
This makes the Carousel Tools run fast and saves disk space,
particularly on floppy-based systems.
This technique of sharing code among programs is
called "overlaying." 
The file
.C run.com
contains the main overlay with the common code,
and the code for performing the functions of the
.I run
command.
Each other Tool is in a special .tol
format that is intended to be loaded with the
common code.
.PP
Here is a visualization of your computer's memory
when you start the shell and then use the
.I ls
Tool and then use a non-Tool program.
.ne 12
.PP
\fB
.EX
       time ->
  a b c       d  e     f    g
  ._._._______.__._____.____.______________
  |_|                  |    |_|
m   |   common code    |    | | common code
e   |__________________|    | |____________
m   |_|       |ls|     |non-| |_|
o     | shell |__|shell|    |   |shell
r     |_______|  |_____|tool|   |_____
y                      |    |
                       |    |
                       |____|
.EE
\fR
.PP
At the different points in time:
.IP
a) you enter
.I sh
and
.C sh.com
is loaded
.IP
b)
.C sh.com
loads
.C run.com
which contains the common code
.IP
c)
.C run.com
loads
.C sh.tol
which types its prompt and waits for you to enter a command
.IP
d) you enter
.I ls
so the shell loads
.C ls.tol
.IP
e)
.C sh.tol
is reloaded when
.I ls
ends so you can enter another command
.IP
f) a non-Tool is loaded and executed by the shell
.IP
g)
.C sh.com
is automatically loaded when the non-Tool ends
and loads
.C run.com
which loads
.C sh.tol
.PP
The automatic reload of the shell after a non-Tool runs is done using the
.I submit
feature of CP/M-80.
.br
.ne 15
.SH
Installing the Tools:  Discussion
.PP
There are several different sizes and types
of disks that are used with CP/M systems.
The Carousel Tools can be easily customized
for your particular setup.
Any installation instructions that came with your
Shell ToolBook should be read
in conjunction with or after reading this discussion.
.PP
The shell load file
.C sh.com
and two related files,
.C run.com
and
.CR sh.env ,
are to reside in a directory called the
"default shell directory".
The rest of the Tools reside in the
"resident Tool directory".
These are often the same directory,
but may be different if desired.
.PP
When you receive the Carousel shell,
it is already set up (installed)
with the two default directories on drive A, user 0.
If you do not use user numbers
and if you do not have
large flppies or a hard disk or
RAM disk (memory used as disk)
this does not need to be changed and
you can skip to "Installing the Shell" on page 5.
You might want to come back to this discussion later, when
you have some experience with the Tools.
Make sure you read "Starting the Shell"
and the following sections starting on page 8.
.PP
.C sh.com
is very small (about 500 bytes).
You should put a copy of
.C sh.com
on the disk containing the default shell directory
under every user number that you use.
(If you do not use user numbers,
you will only copy it to user 0.)
When you start the shell or when the shell is restarted
after a non-Tool is executed by the shell,
.C sh.com
is loaded from the
disk containing the default shell directory,
accessing it under the current user number.
.C sh.com
calls
.C run.com
from the default shell directory to load the common
code, and then it calls the rest of the shell from the file
.C sh.tol
located in the resident Tool directory.
When the shell is restarted after a Tool finishes
only the file
.C sh.tol
is loaded.
.PP
All of this is handled automatically by
.C sh.com
which references
the shell environment file,
.CR sh.env ,
located in the default shell directory.
.C sh.env
contains the PATH entry that shows
the user number and disk of the resident Tool directory.
.C sh.com
has the name of the default shell directory embedded 
in its code by the
.I install
Tool.
.PP
The idea behind installing the Tools is to put them
onto disk in an optimal fashion for your particular computer.
Listed below are three basic configurations
and then a number of things for you to consider.
You do not need to act on them now but you may want
to later.
.PP
Remember, the
default
shell directory has the three shell-related Tools (
.CR sh.com ,
.CR run.com
and
.CR sh.env ),
the resident
Tool directory has the Tools in .tol format,
and both directories may be
on the same disk and user number.
.SH
Large Floppy Disk Drives
.PP
The default shell directory and the resident Tool directory
are put on one floppy,
which is used in drive A.
.SH
Smaller Floppy Disk Drives
.PP
The default shell directory and one resident Tool directory with a
set of Tools you use together
(e.g., those in a ToolBook)
are put on one floppy.
You make several of these floppies, each with
different group of related Tools.
You use these in drive A, putting in a different group
of Tools as needed.
Use the
.I reset
command when changing diskettes in A.
.SH
Hard Disk Drive
.PP
The default and resident directories are put on and used
from the hard disk.
That way they will load faster.
.SH
Considerations
.NP
The resident Tool directory can be on any user number
(and disk) you want.
The
.B PATH
variable in
.C sh.env
will tell the shell where to look for the Tools
and other commands.
The PATH is set with the
.I set
Tool;
you should read about 
.I set
now in the Tool Description
section of the Manual.
.sp
It is often useful to put the default shell directory on user 0
and the resident Tool directory on another user number
that you do not use on the same disk.
That way you will not have the Tools listed every time
you use the
.I ls
Tool on that disk.
(Using a different user number for the resident Tool directory
is not required, just handy sometimes.)
.NP
The ToolBooks contain groups of Tools that are typically
used together,
and that will (usually) fit on one small floppy.
As you gain experience with the Tools you can make new
floppies with the default shell directory and just the
combination of Tools you use for a particular task.
These are called "working shell diskettes." 
.NP
If you have large capacity floppies or a hard disk you can put
the resident Tool directory in one user number and other commands
(e.g., a data base program)
in another user number on the same disk.
Then set the PATH variable to specify that the shell
is to look in both (or all) of those directories for commands.
.NP
If you have some sort of RAM disk
(memory used as disk)
put the default shell directory and the tool
.C sh.tol
there,
perhaps with a select group of Tools that you use a lot.
That way the shell and those Tools
will always be loaded very fast.
If you have a lot of RAM disk
you could also put the TEMP directory
there (see the
.I set
Tool description).
.NP
Whenever possible (i.e., if you have a hard disk)
do not put the resident or default shell directory or any
directory listed in PATH on a floppy drive.
That way the Tools will load faster.
.NP
If you use user numbers
the disk containing the default shell directory
must have the file
.C sh.com
in each user number you use.
.SH
Note:
when you list the files on a disk,
.I only
the files on the current user number are shown
(unless you specify otherwise with the
.I ls
Tool).
This is a problem only if you forget
it when looking for a file.
The
.I which
Tool is helpful for finding the directory you put a command in.
.br
.eh 'Installation''CP/M-80 System-Specific'
.oh 'CP/M-80 System-Specific''Installation'
.ne 15
.SH
Installing the Shell
.PP
When you receive the shell it is installed to reside on
drive A, user 0, and to look for commands in that directory
and the current directory.
For most floppy-based systems this setup will work fine
and you only need to copy the Tool
files to a bootable disk as described
in steps 1 and 2.
.PP
On larger systems,
first you have to decide which directory will be the default
shell directory and which will be the resident Tool directory.
You also have to decide if you want to use user numbers.
.IP
o  If you have floppies both directories will be on drive A and the
default shell directory will (probably) be on user 0.
.IP
o  If you have hard disk it is preferable to put them
on a lower-lettered disk (e.g., C instead of F).
.sp
.LP
The instructions below use the following key:
.RS
.nf
R - drive to contain the resident Tool directory
N - user number to contain the resident Tool directory
X - drive to contain the default shell directory
M - user number to contain the default shell directory
.RE
.LP
Before performing the installation
you must decide where the shell & Tools will reside.
Typical values are
.RS
R=a  N=0  X=a  M=0    for a floppy-based system
R=C  N=1  X=C  M=0    for a hard disk system
.RE
.NP
Copy
.I pip
to the resident Tool directory if it is not already there.
(If you are using a floppy,
you will be copying
.I pip
to a
.B bootable
floppy in drive B.) 
If you are in user 0 and will be using user 0 the following
command will work:
.PP
\fB
.EX
pip R:=A:pip.com
.EE
\fR
.PP
If you are going to use a different user number there is no
way, using
.IR pip ,
to copy a file to another user number so you
must first use the following commands to create
a copy of the
.IR pip
command in the resident Tool directory:
.PP
\fB
.EX
pip
^C			(Control-C)
user N
R:
save 32 pip.com
.EE
\fR
.PP
.NP
If you are using floppies,
move the bootable diskette made above from drive B to drive A.
Insert the master shell disk,
preferably a backup copy, into floppy disk drive B
and enter Control-C.
Then use
.I pip
to
copy the diskette in drive B to the new
resident
Tool directory as follows:
.PP
\fB
.EX
pip R:=B:*.*[g0ov]
.EE
\fR
.PP
If you are using floppies you now have a bootable
diskette with the shell and related
Tools in drive A.
.NP
If you plan to use the shell and Tools from
other than drive A, user 0
record the location of the default shell directory in the files
.C sh.com
and
.CR run.com
by entering
.PP
\fB
.EX
run NR:install -d
.EE
\fR
.PP
and answering the prompts accordingly.
.NP
If the default shell and resident Tool directories
are to be different, the following commands move the required
files to the default shell directory:
.PP
\fB
.EX
run NR:cp NR:sh.com MX:
run NR:mv NR:sh.env MX:
run NR:mv NR:run.com MX:
.EE
\fR
.PP
.NP
Now certain variables must be changed in the environment file,
.CR sh.env .
(These are described in more detail in the
.I set
Tool description.) 
The following will cause the shell
to be accessed properly the first time:
.PP
\fB
.EX
run NR:set ATEND
.EE
\fR
.PP
When you first use the Tools, PATH should be set
by one of the following:
.PP
\fB
.EX
run NR:set PATH NR: MX: .      #general form
run NR:set PATH 0A: .          #typical floppy system
run NR:set PATH 0C: 1C: .      #typical hard disk system
.EE
\fR
.PP
Other directories containing other commands may also be named.
When you start using
.I script
files you may want to change PATH to have the current directory searched for
commands before the Tools directories are checked:
.PP
\fB
.EX
set PATH . NR: MX:
.EE
\fR
.PP
.NP
Now you can start the shell by entering
.PP
\fB
.EX
MX:sh
.EE
\fR
.PP
The shell will respond with its prompt:
.PP
\fB
.EX
%
.EE
\fR
.PP
and then wait for you to enter a command.
.NP
Lastly, if you use user numbers on your system,
the drive containing
the default shell directory
must have copies of
.C sh.com
on all user numbers you use.
First change directories to the default shell directory
.PP
\fB
.EX
% cd /M/X/
.EE
\fR
.PP
Then use the following to copy
.C sh.com
to each of the other user numbers on the disk
with the default shell directory
(substitute the other user numbers for "n"):
.PP
\fB
.EX
% cp sh.com /n/X/
.EE
\fR
.PP
.br
.ne 19
.SH
Starting the Shell
.PP
If you are using the shell from a floppy,
make sure a bootable shell diskette is in
the appropiate drive.
.PP
At any time you are not in the shell you can start it
by entering
.PP
\fB
.EX
X:sh
.EE
\fR
.PP
where "X" is the default shell directory.
On a typical floppy system this would be just
.PP
\fB
.EX
A:sh
.EE
\fR
.PP
The shell will respond by printing its prompt
.PP
\fB
.EX
%
.EE
\fR
.PP
and waiting for you to enter a command.
.br
.ne 15
.SH
Final Steps
.eh 'Confirming Installation''CP/M-80 System-Specific'
.oh 'CP/M-80 System-Specific''Confirming Installation'
.PP
The following steps finish the setting
of certain information used by the shell and Tools.
The information is discussed in the
description of the
.I set
Tool.
.NP
The TEMP variable in
.C sh.env
specifies the directory in which the shell and Tools are
to write temporary and scratch files.
The default is /0/A/.
If you have small-capacity floppies, you
may need to use /0/B/ for TEMP, depending on how full the working shell
diskette in A is.  For example
.PP
\fB
.EX
set TEMP /0/B/
.EE
\fR
.PP
On larger capacity disks it may be useful to put the TEMP directory in
some user number that you do not use so it will be out of the way.
This might be, for example, on user 15 of the disk containing the
default shell directory.
.sp
All temporary files used by the Tools are written to the directory
specified by TEMP
and have a file name extension of
.C .$$$
(e.g.,
.CR eds.$$$ ).
.NP
The MAXDEV variable specifies the last disk drive on your computer.
If you set it
you will not get BDOS errors if you mis-type a directory name.
For example:
.PP
\fB
.EX
set MAXDEV B
.EE
\fR
.PP

.NP
Enter
.PP
\fB
.EX
set -v
.EE
\fR
.PP
to check the changes you have just made to the shell environment file,
.CR sh.env .
.NP
Make at least one copy of each disk
you tailored
so you will not have to repeat this work.
.br
.ne 15
.SH
Confirming Installation
.PP
The following steps will help you confirm that the Tools were installed
properly.
Again, the following keys are used:
.RS
.nf
R - drive containing the resident Tools directory
N - user number of drive containing the resident Tool directory
X - drive containing the default shell directory
M - user number of the drive containing the default shell directory
.RE
.NP
Start the shell:
.PP
\fB
.EX
X:sh
.EE
\fR
.PP
You should get a "%" prompt.
If you have problems:
make sure the default shell directory diskette is in the machine;
or you may not have copied
.C sh.com
to the user number you are using on the disk with the default
shell directory.
The command
.PP
\fB
.EX
MX:sh
.EE
\fR
.PP
will work in the later case.
.NP
Check the contents of the default shell directory.
.PP
\fB
.EX
cd /M/X
ls
.EE
\fR
.PP
The list of files should include
.CR sh.com ,
.CR run.com ,
and
.CR sh.env ;
there may be more.
.NP
Check the contents of the resident Tool directory.  If it is the
same as the default shell directory just look at the list printed
in the previous step.  Otherwise
.PP
\fB
.EX
ls /N/R
.EE
\fR
.PP
will list the directory.
.NP
Confirm the values of the shell variables in the enviroment file.  Enter
.PP
\fB
.EX
set -v
.EE
\fR
.PP
PATH should name at least the default shell directory
and the resident Tool directory.
A typical value for a floppy disk system is
.PP
\fB
.EX
PATH   /0/A/ .
.EE
\fR
.PP
Read the description of the
.I set
Tool for information on the other shell variables listed.
.NP
Enter
.PP
\fB
.EX
ls /N/R | crt
.EE
\fR
.PP
to list the files in the resident Tool directory, one screenful at a time.
This will test that pipes work.
.NP
Enter
.PP
\fB
.EX
ls /N/R .tol > tmp
cat < tmp
ls tmp ; rm tmp
.EE
\fR
.PP
to test I/O redirection.
(Notice that
.I crt
is more useful than
.I cat
for copying a file to the terminal if you have more than 23 lines
in the file.)
.sp
.PP
You have confirmed that the Tools work by using some of them,
and using the major features of the shell.
If you have problems,
contact your dealer or Carousel MicroTools, Inc.
.br
.ne 15
.SH
Installing Other Tools
.eh 'Installing Other Tools''CP/M-80 System-Specific'
.oh 'CP/M-80 System-Specific''Installing Other Tools'
.PP
If you have a floppy-based system with
relatively large capacity
diskettes or a hard disk system
you can just copy additional
Tools to the directory that has
the other Tools.
.PP
On smaller capacity floppy diskettes you will need to make
a series of floppies each of which contains the shell
files and a set of Tools that are used together.
These are called
"working shell diskettes".
(The following assumes the
default and resident directories
are on drive A, user 0.)
.NP
Start the shell in drive A and put
a bootable but otherwise blank
diskette in drive B.
.NP
Copy the shell files and any other
files desired from drive A:
.ne 7
.PP
\fB
.EX
cp sh.tol b:
cp run.com b:
cp sh.com b:
cp sh.env b:
cp cp.tol b:		(not required)
cp pip.com b:		(not required)
.EE
\fR
.PP
.NP
Transfer the new shell diskette from drive B
to drive A, put the diskette with the Tools
to be added in drive B, and enter
.PP
\fB
.EX
reset
.EE
\fR
.PP
.NP
Use
.I cp
or
.I pip
to copy the Tools you want (and will fit)
from B to A.
For example,
.PP
\fB
.EX
pip A:=B:*.tol[g0ov]
.EE
\fR
.PP
