.TH SSKNOW Reminders

CP/M-80 System Specific
Reminders

.bp 15
.TL
REMINDERS
.TE

.PP
The Tools
.ul
cp, ls, mv,
and
.I rm
work with any type of file
(binary, such as .com or .tol, or text).
Most of the other Tools work only with ASCII text files.
.PP
Each time the shell is executed all pending script files
(except background commands) are cancelled.
.PP
The shell and some of the Tools use temporary files.
These files are always put in the directory specified by the TEMP
variable in
.CR sh.env .
The Tools temporary files always have names that end with the extension
.C .$$$
(e.g.,
.CR eds.$$$ ).
.PP
In the TEMP directory,
the only Tool temporary file that has a reason to be there is
.CR backgrnd.$$$ ;
you can get rid of any others
(with a
.C .$$$
extension)
you see.
.PP
The shell cannot execute the CP/M built-in commands
.ul
user, dir, era, type,
and
.I save;
use, respectively, the
.ul
cd, ls, rm,
and
.I crt
Tools instead.
There is no need to run
.I save
from the shell.
.PP
The shell does not properly expand CP/M's "ambiguous" file names when
executing non-Tools.
For example,
"stat *.*" will not work from the shell.
.PP
In general, the Tools can be used from the CP/M CCP
or from the shell.
Tools kept as .tol files must be executed with the
.I run
Tool when they are called from the CCP.
.PP
The shell is just another Tool;
it does not remain in memory while another program is running.
The shell begins execution of multiple commands
by making a command chain similar to the
.C $$$.sub
file made by the CP/M
.I submit
program.
This file is called
.CR shok.$$$ .
During execution of a Tool
.C shok.$$$
is renamed to
.C shbad.$$$
to prevent continuation of the script if the Tool should abort.
.sp
At normal termination, each Tool looks into
.C shok.$$$
to find the next command to execute.
In case the next command is to be the shell,
an internal flag is set so
.C shok.$$$
does not need to be referenced.
.sp
In case of abnormal termination of a Tool or if no
.C shok.$$$
file is found, the shell variable ATEND in the file
.C sh.env
is examined.
If no command has been specified for ATEND,
a CP/M warm boot is performed.
Otherwise the command specified by ATEND is executed.
.sp
Note that the shell always modifies the ATEND
variable to point to itself in order to regain control in the event of an
aborted command.
The
.I logout
Tool modifies ATEND to allow a return to CP/M and should therefore be
used to leave the shell.
Any pending background scripts will be executed when
.I logout
is executed.
.PP
Some word processor-type (non-Tool) programs do not use the international
standard conventions for end-of-line characters.
Files made with such programs may need to be looked at with
.I show
and then modified with
.I tr
before they can be used with the other Tools.
.PP
Directories may be specified in either CP/M or Tools pathname format.
For example, the following are equivalent:
.PP
\fB
.EX
% 0a:crt 2a:file	% /0/a/crt /2/a/file
.EE
\fR
.PP
.PP
You can change directories by specifying just a directory name.
For example, the following are all equivalent:
.PP
\fB
.EX
% cd /2/b		% /2/b
% cd 2b:		% 2b:
.EE
\fR
.PP
.PP
If you put the TEMP directory on a floppy drive
that you change (e.g. on drive B),
you will need to be careful that
background commands (those entered
with a '@' at the end) do not
get lost.
.PP
The Software Tools editor is normally called
.I ed.
It is called
.I e
in the CP/M-80 implememtation
of the Tools to avoid conflict
with the CP/M editor
.CR ed .
.PP
You can rename any Tool except
.ul
sh, run, cd, echo, logout, ls,
or
.C pwd
by just changing the file name.
The new name must have the .tol extension.
